Kda.
Morning
Larry Iru, IRU, uh, qua.
Uh, Larry, Larry Qua.
Brian Omar, welcome to you and your team.
Um, this is, uh, Maori great,
happy Maori Language Week.
Um, we've got the, uh,
members from across parliament here from
for the Maori Fair Select Committee hearing.
Um, welcome.
Uh, we've got a bit of time with you this morning,
so maybe we will open for some, you know, you're welcome
to give some brief opening remarks.
Um, otherwise we're happy to have a good call at all
with you about past performance
and future aspirations and intent there.
So, um, over to you.
Oh, Tina, uh, uh,
uh, nowhere I've got, uh, pressure on time.
So we thought we might just spend, uh, sort
of a couple minutes just sort of talking
to our strategic context
and kind of really what are the, uh,
the big challenges on the horizon.
Hopefully Everything works.
Um, presentation should be showing now.
Um, just next slide, Please. Just,
Uh, um, yeah, we're a Maori language agency.
Uh, our contributions to Maori language revitalization, uh,
through, uh, the funding
of Maori language content distributed across a range of, uh,
linear and digital platforms.
Um, and this year we celebrated 30 years.
And so, yeah, our origins coming from, uh, the protest
movement, uh, you know, starting off in Iwi radio
and all of those, uh, fantastic sort
of legacy programs right through to the creation
of Kata Maori.
And, you know, in more recent times, you know, the emergence
of Maori content, particularly digital content,
are going across a range of social media platforms
and digital platforms.
Um, really fantastic to celebrate that.
And we thought we'd just have a quick, uh, one minute sort
of show reel, just sort of showcasing some
of the highlights, uh, over the last 30 years.
Oh,
My name is boy And welcome
To my interesting. Will
we march to be seen? We march to be heard.
Not one.
Awesome.
Go back to the As.
As a, as a content creator,
I'm in de the quality of the video.
Alright. It's very challenging.
Just move to the Next slide.
Uh, the one after that, please.
So, just thinking about, just in terms of how we fit
with other Maori language entities.
So you'll be aware of T Maori.
I always think we kind of like the, we have the thing
that helps welcome people into the fa um,
but when you look at, uh, Maori language revitalization
or language revitalization area, it kind
of operates across these five domains.
And so really our principle contribution is really around
il uh, raising the status of IL Maori
and, um, inducing your positive societal attitudes
towards to the Maori.
Uh, I went to the warehouse on, on, um, Saturday morning.
I, I, I forced my kids to up early.
I thought we'll be there first.
Uh, we got there at 20 past eight and,
and there were about a T-shirt, uh, big enough
to fit it like a six month old baby left.
So just when you think about that societal shift
and we think about 30 years of progress,
you can feel it every year that societal shift,
that positive attitudes towards Del.
And so really just looking forward to the,
the 30 years ahead as well for us.
Um, and I'll just skip ahead
and just talk about our impact framework.
So we are very lucky, um, in terms
of language revitalization.
Uh, we build on the work of, uh, professor Higgins
and, uh, professor, uh, Dr.
Poer Iwi. Uh, so their work in terms
of zipper was the first indigenous, uh,
language revitalization framework.
And so we've adapted that we could move forward.
That's it. Um, in terms of copa, so COPA is a spectrum
and it starts with, uh, re so those that really aren't, uh,
focused on IL Paul, those that have, uh, positive, uh,
attitudes and are may be starting
to think about committing towards learning il.
And then, which is where the nice, bright,
bright sun shines Mm-Hmm.
And is really around active users of il.
And so the strength of this spectrum is that it's inclusive,
so everyone can sit on that spectrum.
And really our strategy is around right shifting.
So how do we support people wherever they are on
that spectrum to be moving towards being active users of il?
That's awesome. And you can kind of see in terms of, uh,
as a data tool, uh, we can kind of map where society sits,
uh, in terms of that spectrum.
So it's segmented down into greater detail.
And if we could very interesting, um, just shows you
that there are also, uh, personas, uh,
around each of these Mm-Hmm.
So we can kind of get a sense of who they are, uh,
what their media habits are like.
So, um, that kind of,
we also have quite sophisticated impact data around, uh,
the individual pieces of content.
Um, but what this does is just kind of gives us a human face
as to who are we trying to address
and what are their needs, aspirations,
and how we can best compromise content to support them
to have that positive, uh, shift.
I think it's my, uh, lifelong journey to try to move to,
from being in the, um,
but thinking about that, you can kind
of gain a sense in terms
of those demographics of where we sit.
And again, I think the strength of it is, it's inclusive.
Everyone's got a space and we can start to be more
targeted in terms of how we, uh, support all
of those different, uh, segments along that copper spectrum
to be moving towards active, actively using today.
I might pass on to Larry, um, just to talk through just some
of the sort of future focused issues in terms of challenges
and opportunities on the horizon.
And then we, we'll, uh, close it.
Yeah. Just, um, uh,
before I do that, just in terms of the corporate, what, um,
what as an example of the insights that we can get is that,
um, we know that, that when you look at the P three,
that's about 22% of the population.
Mm-Hmm. And, um, uh, we know that that 22
to 44, uh, uh, uh, significant Maori
and Polynesian, uh, uh, cohort within that.
So, and they, they're urban liberal, but,
but that appearance of the kids at school.
So one of the things that we sort of are thinking about is
how can we use the kids learning in school
to actually trigger, um, them from being passive to active?
Um, is, is that the light blue one in the screen?
Is it Yeah. Yeah. The 21%. 21%. Yeah.
Um, so that, that's a significant cohort and Mm.
And we know that they've, you know,
they're very kindly disposed of the notion of,
but they aren't actually active doing something.
Mm. And how can we, how can we trigger them first? Yeah.
I think we know a lot of people like that. Yeah.
Um, so I've got, put my specs on now.
Uh,
I'll just scroll down.
Skip two slides again.
So, so just, the other thing is, is, um, what we have done,
uh, we used to do an annual survey to, to, that's
how we segmented the population.
But what we have done now is we have, um,
inserted our segmentation questions into the Nielsen CMI.
And so instead of having 2000, uh, survey
of 2000 people per, we now have two
and a half thousand per quarter.
And so that's 10,000 over the period of year
with a much more robust,
and it also enables us
to elegantly insert the Nielsen's rating
information into the same model, which gives us a, a, uh,
an impact model, which we, we are sort
of still in prototype on that.
Um, yeah, so, you know, one of the, the challenges is the,
is obviously the change in media landscape.
Um, we all understand the rapid, uh, way that the media is,
um, involving.
And that requires us to, to, to be as agile as we can
to cope with, um, you know, the multifaceted challenges that
that's going to, uh, uh, uh, present for us.
Um, and our static, our,
our fundings remain relatively static for some time.
Um, and as a result, uh, each funding round becomes more
and more difficult because, you know, you're, you're faced
with, uh, more, um, uh,
applications, uh, uh, a bigger ask for pier, um,
more diverse, uh, platforms and options.
So it's, it's, it's complicating the, the,
the landscape for us as well.
Um, yeah, the landscape continues to evolve more diverse,
uh, investment opportunities to consider.
Um, there's a thriving international, um, component
to the wider, uh, screen, screen production sector,
which has an inflationary impact on our costs.
Mm-Hmm. Um, you know, and well, not just our, our cost,
but our resources
or access to resources for our content creators.
So, um, they've gotta compete with, um, the, those that, uh,
are making the big international projects.
So that's a challenge.
And all in, I, uh, all that time, we still need to try
and, uh, produce rich, um, engaging content for,
uh, our, our, our cohort.
Um, we, we, we see ourselves with a dual, um, obligation.
Um, we've talked about corporate and,
and changing the hearts and minds of, of, uh, wider,
but we also have increasingly, um, a,
a strong, a, a developing obligation to ensure
that there's good kai for those
that are on the language journey.
So we are good fluent content that is going to engage those
that are, uh, already engaged in Del Maori.
And so it, yeah, it, it's, um,
a little bit of a juggling act.
And as you would appreciate, it's only going
to get more difficult as, um, you know, the, the bulk
of Maori audiences, um, or online
and digital, uh, and not watching linear.
And, um, and that, that's a challenge. What do we do?
Do we go where the audiences are with our Maori, uh,
content, which is probably what we have to do.
And that means, um, leaving behind linear Mm-Hmm.
Um, yeah. So there's some, some big decisions here.
Um, collaboration is, is something
that we, uh, uh, work very hard on.
And, um, some of the, the, the, the,
the bolder collaborations you will have seen, like, um,
our involvement with, uh, Maki, um, we, you know, we
worked with Rani, um, to develop the campaign.
Then we funded some of it.
We, we got together funding from other
agencies to contribute to it.
Um, we right down to the advertising campaigns.
And, and obviously we do that
because that's a big vehicle for changing hearts and minds.
Um, similarly, you know, the, uh,
the, uh, anthems initiative that d anyway,
Mohi initiated, um, again,
the ongoing impact of that for, um, Maori music
has been substantial.
So, uh, yeah, we, um,
And, And I've already alluded to the, the fact
that we need to, to go where the audiences are,
which is going to present us a further challenge.
Uh, I suppose the, the part for me is that, you know,
when, when we look forward
and, um, here we are, we are looking back 30 years,
if we look forward 30 years,
and particularly some of the events
that have happened recently.
So we look at the King Tonga and we have a new queen.
So the new queen will be 57 years old in 30 years time.
She is of the generation that is coming through now
that are fluent.
And these are the ones that really are driving a lot of what
to Malay, PA is always shifting towards.
Um, you know, there are other things, uh,
the speech competitions just happened last week,
and as a parent now a grandparent of children that have gone
through that system, all you can see is that
the standards are just going beyond
what we ever thought was possible.
Mm-Hmm. And so, you know, 2054 will be
nearly a hundred years going.
So, you know, these things that, in terms of looking forward
in terms of Al Maori, you know, those are the things
that we see as the longevity
and ones that we need to be working towards.
You know, the first Dewi radio station, 1987,
you know, it'll be 87 years
of Maori Maori Iwi radio in 30 years.
So what does that mean for us?
So I guess for us at the board, we are cognizant
of those markers,
but we are also looking to see, as, you know,
so, you know, we've come so far not to continue.
And so, you know, that frames a lot of
what we are looking at,
but still cognizant of, uh, what's out there Mm.
What the demand is, what is driving it in terms
of the younger generation.
And I suppose, you know, we see Tam Pao,
I'm a returning board member.
Uh, I'm the most recent returner to the board
after some time away,
but I, I just want to talk about it in this way.
You know,
so we have a saying in Maori,
if you are, you have a heavy, heavy foot, you're going
to end up with some problems.
If you're a, um, person who likes speed,
you probably know all about that.
But, um, our, we are an agile, we're an agile agency,
uh, and we have to be
because to keep responding to
what we are seeing out in the, out in the community.
Um, so, you know, we are, we are the, we are the Wai,
aka we have to stay agile, but we feed those Wai ua
and they are, if you like, the risk takers, the innovators,
the creators, the creative minds.
So, you know, we are always con cognizant of that
and just seeing where things are going.
So I think for the 30 years, if I'm lucky
to still be here, I will be a hundred years old.
Yes. And so, you know, um,
but you know, you have to look forward, when we look back,
we look forward and see what's been achieved in these 30
years, what more can be achieved in the next 30 years.
And, you know, we, we, you know, all of us sitting
around here, you know, I can only imagine
what can be achieved.
So I think, you know, whilst we see what we've achieved
and we have this as a basis
and a standard, we know that it will continue to go beyond
and be driven by this generation, the generation
that is the new Maori queen, the generation
that are growing up as fluent speakers,
and with those demands, but also with those standards.
Yeah. So, you know, it's, it's, it's just wonderful
to be able to see that this is where things have got
so far as to where they'll be.
So I'll just leave it then.
Um, alright. Members, we've got about half an hour for, so
who would like to start us off?
Um, um, um,
um, so yeah.
Um, so I've, and when I look back on my own language
journey, which I feel I've known where I'd sit on
that spectrum, maybe, maybe just to the left
of the center, but Australia,
Um, you, you're a,
You're a one because you're,
you're actually active deeply doing something about it.
Yeah. Yeah. It, it's a measure
of attitudes and behavior
Not pro.
Interesting. Right. That's interesting.
Not proficiency. Yeah. Me, I got 10. Okay.
Um, so my question is around,
I guess probably a bang, bang for buck.
'cause you guys have spoken, uh, well, about, in terms
of, in terms of shifts.
And then when I look at the, you, you, the, the, um, uh,
Tahu taught, um,
and the way that the,
that the one on the far right hand side is,
is not actually watching, um, uh, broadcast television.
And in fact, I'm not even entirely sure
how much video content or what kind kind
of video content it is watching. That's What's that?
That's me. I'm sitting
Over there. Yeah.
So, so, and, and,
and I think back to, um, something like, you know,
'cause that's just,
um, is that what, what, what are you seeing in terms
of the shift of the time of the type of content
that's actually providing Best Bang for Fit Bang for Clark?
And where do you see that going?
Because obviously it's, I'm presuming it's a heck
of a lot cheaper to produce.
Um, you know, p um, um,
Yeah, I, um, what, what I would say is that,
uh, we can generate really big impact.
Um, and I can't prove it other than with the numbers.
Um, because our impact model is measures
what, um, changes, uh, has happened.
But we've only got linear, uh, data in there at the moment,
rather than we have, we haven't got wide access to, um,
digital data we're working on.
Right. But, um, I just, you know, you've talked about, uh,
ting over then have a look at, uh, uh,
if you had a look at his content, you know, so
we have funded him on Tiki, we funded him, um,
to, uh, when, when Rangi went to London.
And, uh, like, you know, on
Maki, I think he got 9 million, uh, views on his own,
his content, you know, um, it's just, yeah, that's where,
uh, young people are, you know,
and it's not just young people.
Um, I'm wearing my t tour badge today,
not my, uh, Tippen badge.
Uh, but on Saturday I was at Tippen, um, for the, of the,
of the, of the schools, the schools and,
and was there, um,
and I was absolutely amazed at all
of these tippen old boys coming up to him
and wanting to have a picture with him.
Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, that is an indication
of the depth of his impact on, uh, you know,
uh, our audiences.
So yeah. I, I, it's, that's where a lot
of fu ob obviously, you know,
we can't totally ignore a, a lot of other things.
Mm. But I can see us saying,
um, that we aren't gonna fund linear television content,
um, in the very, very foreseeable future.
Um, and so just by way of an example, uh, of
where things could go is, is we, uh, are currently working
with the Maori news and current affairs sector.
And what we are suggesting is that there should be a central
hub for, for, for all might news and current affairs,
and we will fund people to, uh, create content or,
or tell the stories and put it on that, that hub.
And then all of the publishers, like TDNZ have access to
that pool of content and they can take it
and package it as they want.
If they want to take, uh, stories
and turn it into to a, uh, a linear
half hour program, they can do that.
But, uh, yeah.
Very interesting. Yeah. Um, Partai, tap,
Tap, um, yeah,
because the, uh, again, reflecting back on,
on my own journey, and those of those are my friends
that I've been walking with, it's,
we're actually accessing material.
Most of the cases that was, that was,
that you guys funded from a long time ago.
So, uh, all the Waka episodes and they mentioned, um, TGA
and, uh, Al Poo.
Um, what's the other one that I, I'm trying
to remember the other podcast I listen to a lot on,
and I listen to that when I, when I, when I'm running,
'cause to the way Heidi, um, um,
and so that's not even, you know, content
that you're having to produce now.
Yeah. So it's that, that, that timeless kind of resource,
um, that's exciting.
I love that, that news idea. That's a, it's a strong one.
Um, yeah. Uh, yep.
Can I, could we just say expand a little bit on the,
I suppose that you'd call it a repository of, of content?
Uh, what do you see the challenges are
for development such in America?
Oh, um, ions, no.
Um, Um,
no, actually, um, I have to say that, uh, you know,
obviously the,
what we're talking about is people's livelihoods here and,
and, uh, when you're changing things like that.
And, um, uh, we've been working
through a process, um, whereby I think that, you know,
in the last three months we've had two Ana with the sector,
um, and, and the sector has now formed a working group
that is going to, you know, they're going to
let them have their space to, um, to, to
consider all of the implications.
But I can see that we will,
we won't do it in this financial year,
but it is conceivable that next financial year
that will be the, the model.
And, um, uh, yeah.
So it, uh, and, and,
and, and people see it, you know, um, obviously they, um,
want to know whether their show is gonna be funded,
but what they need to understand is that, um, uh,
it's their stories that they can continue to make
and put on the, um, and,
and a part of achieving that was, um,
about four years ago, we got, uh, $300,000
for innovation.
Um, and what we did was we prototyped, um,
uh, hubs and then it was successful, so we got $3 million
to, to do it and, and they were successful.
Um, and so now we've got $5 million a year that we, uh,
are using for those, those hubs.
And I can see us, you know,
we've just about got full coverage, we probably, uh,
need one or two more.
And, um, and that is starting to
demonstrate to the sector what's possible.
I, OCA has one of those hubs,
so they're collaborating with FKA Maori, um,
and providing content to FKA Maori.
And I think, um, yeah, the, the, by the,
in the new financial year, I imagine we'll be there.
Mm-Hmm.
I have a question. I really like your segmentation model.
I think that's quite, um,
innovative in the way it's been applied
to your organization.
Um, I'm just wondering if you can expand on what is it
taking that framework, how does that, um,
impact the way you choose to, you know,
fund certain initiatives
that might target particular personas?
Like I guess, you know, you, you can't do everything.
Do you go after one persona, you know, for example,
around that midpoint?
Um, is it, you know, what's the strategy for from
to Mongo paho?
Is it
Despite sort of zoom out?
Yeah. And I think one of those earlier slides we kind
of talked about, um, yeah, those five dimensions.
So you've got status critical awareness acquisition domains,
and corpus corpus, um, it, it's,
it's not like you can have it either or approach.
If I think of some of my friends, um,
who raised their children in il, they sort of hit problems
around language rejection.
Where even when you can have someone
that's highly fluent in il, if their view is
that society doesn't love IL
and it's not cool, then they reject the
language and speak English.
And so we can't just sort of have a all in on one segment.
We have to kind of create the conditions for the language
to thrive, uh, for there to be sort
of general positive societal attitudes,
and then those that make that decision to learn,
how do we then sort of turbocharge, it's just more of an and
and as opposed to an either all where we kind of have
to make investments across that spectrum so
that across the board we are all sort of shifting Mm.
Uh, further to the right,
Any work done around the type of, um,
um, cost to shift.
Right. Based on where you are on that spectrum.
And I'm probably going into the weeds
of the model a bit too much, but
Yeah, I, I, I, the both, uh, the answer to both of those,
um, questions really is, is no.
Yeah. I think that at the moment, um,
what we are doing is mostly looking at it to try
and understand, uh, you know, the, the population, um,
a a a reasonably early next step might well be
that we start using, um, uh, the,
the segmentation model, um, to, to
inform our decision making.
However, um, there's another component which I, I, I alluded
to the impact model where, uh,
we have developed a, a, an impact model.
We, we had a data scientist on our payroll for three years
until IID come and took her office
There go.
But, um, uh, and, and she was, uh, uh, amazing.
And we, we, we developed this impact model so that
what we can do is we can pro provide a score out of
a hundred, um, for each piece of content that we fund
in terms of its impact on,
and, um, uh, you know, she created an algorithm
that draws on the data that we've got to,
to, to provide this.
And, and reach becomes a relatively small component.
It's actually what did it, did it impact your behaviors?
Did it change your attitudes?
Uh, did it make you do something? Yeah.
It influence you to do something.
And it, it's, it's still in a prototype at the moment,
but, um, uh, when we we're in the market for another, uh,
data scientist at the moment,
and when we, we get one, we'll be able to progress
that work, um, uh, further.
And so that's, I think how we're going to be looking at, uh,
using the segmentation model and, uh, uh, and,
and what it enables in terms of the impact, uh,
model that we developed.
Very interesting. Um, when we think about it, like
the corporate model itself is world leading.
You know, we've got an indigenous language revitalization
framework that comes from here
to have an impact measurement model
that is actually provides quite sophisticated data
around quite an intangible thing.
Like how much do people love TE Maori?
And being able to, um, one, sort of test our processes,
the systems, it's taken kind of a couple years,
get baseline data, uh, iron out sort of all of the wrinkles.
But progressively over the years coming, it's gonna be
how do we then start to use that data
to make informed strategic decisions Mm-Hmm.
How are we starting to report?
And I think too, working with the sector so
that collectively we are all sort
of leveling up our understanding around what works best,
what's gonna be most impactful to kind of get the answer
to your question of, you know,
where should we be prioritizing investment for impact.
Yeah.
And, and, and the, the next big hurdle for us in
that is likely to be actually access to,
um, online data.
So, you know, there's a resistance to providing us with data
and, you know, we don't want to necessarily go to the,
the point of, um, demanding it,
otherwise you don't get funding.
Uh, but we need to, um, get access to
all of the online data so that we, you know,
we've got a, a richer picture.
Mm-Hmm. Very interesting. I've got a tap, Patrick.
Thank you. Um, I just wanna say, you know,
that it's amazing, uh, called model is fantastic,
and it's one of the first times I've seen in this space an
outcomes, you know, a way to measure where you're going.
What, my question is, do you have in your mind, um,
and I may have missed this if you've already covered this,
so I apologize, but, um, we, you see that line in
next year in three years
and five years, uh, uh, do you have a an idea in your head
of, of where that's going to be?
Because of course, that's the, the aim, that's the vision.
And, and how do you then articulate?
Largely we sort of focus on incremental, uh, approaches.
Mm-Hmm. So there's always sort of little
stretch targets each year.
Mm-Hmm. But again, I think as we progress
and kind of learn more, then we'll be able
to be a lot more targeted
and kind of get into more prescriptive.
So we've got a couple of experiments that are kind
of looking at with a future focus, um, you know,
where should we be and kind of our assumptions around how
to get there and start to test it.
So I think at the moment we've sort of started off with kind
of descriptive data.
We're sort of trying to get into the diagnostic, so to go,
okay, why and how are we creating these outcomes?
And then we're starting to build some of the systems
around prescriptive that Yeah.
If we, if we put a little bit more poutier here than we
should see an increase over there. Mm-Hmm.
And, sorry, one more. And,
and does that, how do you balance then?
Because it will incrementally move as the population moves.
Um, so, so that change will happen anyway,
and then there's the step change as well.
Is that something that you take into consideration?
Trying to talk to the,
The, the split w um,
we, we don't know quite yet.
And I think that's when it kind of gets into
that prescriptive phase.
Yes. Okay. Well, what we,
we are noticing in just recent data is there's been a
slight left shift.
Yeah. Um, which is concerning.
And so again, the data doesn't tell us why,
so we can't attribute that to something,
but it's something we'll be paying a lot of attention
to, uh, looking ahead.
Yeah. And, and I think, you know, um, uh, we, we,
we've got a target of trying to right shift the midpoint on,
on the corporate model, 2% per annum.
And, um,
but what we, what we need to understand is in our old model,
2% plus or minus was the margin of error.
Um, so we, we could have moved 2%,
but effectively stayed this in the same place.
Yes. Um, uh,
and, uh, yeah, so, uh,
there's, there's a, it's interesting to see what
influences people when they respond to,
um, surveys, you know?
Mm. Uh, so, um, uh, quite often they want
to tell you what you, they think you want to hear.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and so we are still sort
of working our way through that. And Mm.
Uh, just new question from Shannon Halbert, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, the public's been blown away by the number
of policies rolled out by the government, uh,
that negatively impact maed.
And last week the government announced, uh, an instruction
to chief executives to effectively be colorblind,
um, and be needs focused for all New Zealanders.
I'm interested in how
that impacts on the mahi that you've been doing.
Uh, I guess the levers that have enabled, enabled you
to do what you are doing.
Um, and when it comes to funding in particular, there is,
um, uh, constraints around your funding
and what resources, uh, will be cut effectively as a result
of some of those decisions.
I think just what we mentioned
before was just a really, it's a recent trend, um,
but what we've seen for the first time
is a slight regression Mm-Hmm.
And again, the data doesn't tell us why,
but I, I suppose it does remind us we are not in a neutral
environment, uh,
and we have to think carefully about the messages you're
sending out to the nation.
And again, we're all about supporting positive societal
attitudes, uh, towards il,
and it's also really key in terms of those, uh, yeah.
Our language speakers in sustaining and preserving
and transmitting the language to our tam.
So I just think that in a, in that environment, um,
we would hate to see, uh, you know, a regression
in the data coming through, um,
because of some negative narratives that are out there.
Um, so with that change to be needs based, what have you had
to identify currently to change your current practice
or effectively some of the mahi that you've been doing?
I don't think that we, uh, that we, uh, uh, are going
to need to change our approach really,
because we are a, you know, a Maori language agency
and, uh, by
and large, um, we put out a, um, a an RFP
for proposals, and then we assess those proposals.
And the, the best, uh, you know, the,
the best proposals rise to the top.
And, you know, we've funded non-Maori production companies,
um, that have put in really good, um, uh, proposals, uh,
you know, provided they can demonstrate capability to, um,
uh, deliver the language outcomes that, that, uh,
we're seeking, then, you know, that's been the case.
And, and a lot, uh, previously I, um, a number
of Maori content creators
or ideas, people have actually sought a umbrella themselves
under a non-Maori, uh, production, uh, entity
because of the resource
and capability that they can actually add to the picture.
So I don't see us having to change direction at all.
Um, I, I mean, uh, on, on the other hand, there will be,
um, Maori agitation for the money to go to Maori entities.
And, uh, again, you know, um,
the proposals are, are what we, uh,
judge things on. Mm-Hmm.
I'll just add to that. I think for Maori, there's, yeah,
the evidence is really clear that, uh,
the stronger we are in our language
and culture, the greater positive impact
that has in terms of our wellbeing.
So it has a multiplier effect if we look at, um, yeah,
it's like a protective quality.
Um, yeah. The stronger our kids are in terms of knowing
who they are, the better their lifetime trajectories,
their opportunities, education, how, just across the board.
I think the other side of that too is when we look at that,
one of the interesting problems we have is Maori being able
to access, uh, Maori language training
because it's so full of Pakeha, uh, that are so in luck.
Yeah. Greg. Yeah, Greg, that's a fantastic problem to have.
You know, we actually have, uh, yeah,
it's a way in which we can foster koa.
I think that's a beautiful legacy from, uh, uh, yeah, to go
that actually we do have, uh, you know, problems
and it's a global issue in terms of social fragmentation
and division, that Rio Maori is one of these things
that fosters koa in cohesion.
It brings us together.
So I think it enhances for Maori, it enhances what it means
to be Maori, but I think when we think about
it enhances what it means to belong to this place.
And so it has a, a positive societal impact.
Um, supplementary, uh, new question, new question.
Supplementary from you just did. Yep.
Um, here, so here, um, when you see that this,
this real disturbing trend of potentially, uh,
move away from the embracing of the language, what, what,
what year is that measuring?
Oh, that's the, that's this the last 12 months.
So the 12 months ending when,
Uh, well, to the end of,
and end of June.
This, yeah. This year.
So, so end of June this year.
So that's, so that's tracking from June to June.
So July, Joe, so essentially July to June. Yeah. Okay.
And before that, like up till then you had just con
consistently seen an increase?
No, no. I, I'm not consistently seeing an increase. Right.
We didn't see, um, a move to the left,
but we would see static, um, and,
and move to the, to the right, but,
but, um, not, not a consistent 2% or
Right. So this last 12
months is the first time, though,
that you've seen a shift to the left?
Yeah. This is the first time we've had a, a, a,
a perceivable, uh, perceivable shift to the left.
Um, I think that, um, the other thing that I would add, uh,
in terms of the history of, of our corporate model is that,
um, you know, the first iteration of it, uh,
might have given us a glo uh, glowing picture,
but it then, as we, we refined the model
and made it more robust,
that's when we started standing still.
But we, we weren't concerned about that
because we knew that we were getting, uh,
an even more accurate picture. So.
Okay. And the new model came in when,
Uh, three years ago.
Yeah. Okay. We
Got a new question from Dr. Lawrence.
Um, so, yeah.
Uh, a my, if this has been asked already, um,
but I really wanted to know in terms of whether you see
a shift in terms of the funding
and you seeing more applicants, uh,
more younger applicants from Kentucky
and having more program looking at, uh, that's made for
by, uh, well made by, and also for Tataki and Tamari,
because for me, I have, like, personally,
I understand the importance of representation as, you know,
when it comes to media landscape in particular.
So the first question is whether you see that shift in terms
of the demographics of people who are applying.
Uh, and then a follow up question then is, um,
have there been any work or, uh, surveys
or analysis being done on the impact it has for
the confidence and how Ranga
and Tamari in general perceive their connect connectedness
with their environment
and, you know, with Trio and et cetera?
In general?
What I would say is that I think that we've been ahead
of the curve in terms of, um, uh, ran tahi and, and,
and engaging with Ranga Tahi.
Um, we've done quite a lot of experimentation.
I don't whether, you know, um, ha ha, um, you know, uh,
it started quite some time ago, uh, um, our experimentation
where, you know, we, um, uh, took, took a few risks.
Um, most of them have paid off.
Um, and now I think that what you will see is,
um, a, a significant proportion, I I, I, it's still,
you know, a minority, but,
but a growing proportion of our funding is going to, uh, ran
led initiatives.
And, um, we are currently contemplating, uh,
a new SOI for the next, it'll be a five year plan.
Um, traditionally a a a a, you know,
an SOOI has been very high level mm-Hmm.
And, um, uh, and,
and there's no doubt that it would, uh,
it would serve five years.
Um, uh, the, the conversations we've been having in, uh,
the, the early thinking around our next SOI is
that the SOI will actually signal change over the period
of the SOI, which, which aligns us
with the reality more than, um, uh, than, than
what we've been aligned in the past.
And, and I think that it will signal, as I alluded
to earlier, um, uh, a move, a very strong move to
digital first and, um, away from linear.
I mean, we know that that's a fastest growing
demographic in the country.
Yeah. Mm-Hmm. And so we also know that when we have content
that's distributed in digital platforms,
targeting those audiences
and created by those audiences,
they're the most impactful kind
of investments we can be making.
Mm-Hmm.
Um, time for one more question members. Yeah.
Uh, Darlene, Ana,
Um, my question, uh, just, just sitting in all, first
of all, for everything that has been achieved and,
and the, that it go out into the future for our, well,
I'm really excited I won't be here in a few years.
Doesn't we know that this market has continued?
My question is, is just on one of the, the figures in terms
of the key achievements,
I read 74,700 hours Te Maori content,
and I, I'm hoping you can help me put that into a context of
how much content is out there that, uh, Maori or,
or, you know, and,
and,
um, just to,
Um, I, uh, that's probably the biggest piece
of puffery in our, uh, our presentation.
Um, it, it actually includes all of the content
that we funded in the 12 month period, which includes all
of the Maori language content on Iwi radio,
on Iwi radio stations.
So, you know, um, uh,
we've gone away from actually, um, measuring ours Mm-Hmm.
Um, when I was at F Maori
and in my early days at Tam, pa,
we were focused purely on ours.
And actually, we would set a target for a number of hours
in the, in, um, uh, the year and then try and beat it.
Um, but, you know, that's not necessarily, um, uh,
productive because you can beat that by making a whole lot
of crap, uh, um, you know, very cheap, um, uh,
ours that don't have any impact.
Mm-Hmm. So what we've done is moved away from that and,
and we're focusing on, uh, what makes it impact,
Thank you, supplement, but just
to understand just the perspective of how many hours
of content is actually out there to your,
I would say that just, just, this is ballpark figure.
We are talking about 180,000 hours,
um, or something like that.
I, i 600, 700 hours of content
a year for 30 years, you know, like some
Hundreds of thousands times.
Um, AMI, we've ran out of time.
Um, this, you know, just wanna say on behalf
of the committee, thanks for the work you do.
Thanks for coming before us today.
Uh, thanks, you Mahi, um, doctor and Brian
and Larry and all your team.
We look forward to seeing the, um, fruits of your labor
and the next, in your review cycle, you, bye. Welcome.
Thank you very much.
Would members like to keep the, um,
introductory remarks short so there's more time
for questions or?
Well, I think they have a pre Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Jamie
Maori happy Maori Language Week.
Good. Um, welcome to the committee for the annual review.
20 22, 20 23. Government moves Fast.
That's not long ago. Um, look,
really good to welcome you here.
We've got members of parliament from across parliament here.
Um, we've got about,
we don't have too long with you, unfortunately.
Um, got about, um, it's just,
you know, 40 odd minutes.
So if you wanna keep your remarks reasonably short
so we can have a good quarter or That'd be great.
Everyone. We did, we did think about whether we would, um,
conduct our remarks totally in il, but, um,
Wish I was in Taranaki.
So what, what we have is a few slides,
and so, um, we are keen
to keep our opening remarks, uh, quite tight.
And we thought it'd be just useful to outline some context
before we have an open discussion
and questions with you all.
So if you turn to slide two, uh, you'll see there that, uh,
we have pun, which is our strategic narrative.
Um, and we embarked on this, on this journey,
and I opened with the, that, uh, aligns
with this particular approach.
Uh, we're really fortunate that we, uh,
we're given a narrative and worked with Dr.
ua, um,
and the approach was really about how do we rein
re indigenize ourselves,
and how do we sort of, uh,
find inspiration in those narratives that reflect
who we are as, as Maori.
Um, and this particular narrative, uh,
symbolizes our mission, and, uh, it refers to Tani and,
and lifting these celestial bodies into, uh,
the sky to bring light.
And when you think about that
and you think about our role in terms of, uh, light
and sharing stories and aspirations, you know, we want
to be guided by the stars that you see sort
of in this particular diagram.
And so we like ourselves to a modern day Waka, uh,
for Kata Maori, and we are looking to navigate the,
the media landscape.
And in doing so, you know, we have, we have Kai, our Kai,
we refer to them as Kaihoi.
Um, and, you know, when we think about our journey
and our mission, it's very much about ensuring our language
and our culture reaches audiences both in
and across, across the world.
And, um, when we reflect on sort of our recent history,
you know, our, our reach
and our engagement with audiences has increased, which is,
which is really heartening.
Um, but as, as you know, there's much more work to go.
If we go to slide three, next slide.
Um, there are sort of five, five key sort
of points I wanna touch on when we think about
connecting to audiences.
So first and foremost, we've, uh, refreshed the hupa, uh,
which is our outcomes framework, which a lot, uh, aligns
with our long-term vision, and is very much centered
around ensuring that we're able to measure our impact
and our contribution to the outcomes.
And fundamentally, that long-term vision being, uh,
which is our sort of strategic initiative.
And, you know, it's, we are, we're one,
we're one organization,
one entity in this particular particular journey when we
think about how we provide IL across homes,
communities, and workplaces.
Um, the second, the second point I want
to touch briefly on is the growth in our Maori Plus app.
Hopefully you've all got that on your phones
and, um, on your, um, or the Kahaka fans will.
And, um, and really pleasingly to see, we're really pleased
to see that we've surpassed 199,000 downloads, uh, which,
you know, places us up there in terms of, um, you know, one
of the most downloaded, um, streaming apps.
Um, and also sort of the gains sort of being able
to focus on our, on our content.
Um, the third piece is, uh, audience engagement.
Um, you, you would've read in the report,
and certainly a focus for us has been, you know, we
we're 20 years old this year.
We still have the same piece of legislation,
which is very much focused on linear.
Um, but a big focus for us, um, has been to, uh,
look at digital channels
and ensuring that we can show up, um,
through those channels, uh, to our audience.
And, you know, we've had sort of really great sort of, uh,
growth and users online, so four
and a half million, um, 5.8 million video views,
and our weekly sort of social media.
And that presence that we have through some
of those social channels is, is also sort
of lifting substantially.
Sort of, our reach is about 2.5 million.
Um, so that's the audience growth.
Um, and then we also have, uh, te Maori News,
which is continuing to grow.
Um, people said news was gonna die,
but actually what we've found with, um,
our approach in refreshing the way in which we,
we tell those stories, and
we've got a lot of younger people.
Mm. Shane and I feel very old in our organization,
particularly when you think about these younger journalists
that are, are coming through and, you know,
and we are wanting to sort of support them
and they have a very different perspective from the time
that Shane and others were around doing,
doing their thing here in Parliament.
Um, but, and another key relationship we
have is Maori active.
Um, so on YouTube.
So we've partnered with, uh, secondary school sports
and, uh, we see that as a big opportunity, not only for us,
but particularly around sort of how we reach the sort
of younger demographic, um, Maori
and non Maori, um, and also parents.
And so that's continuing to grow
and, you know, we can always improve in terms
of our Maori commentary and pronunciation.
But again, you know, it's, it's,
it's another avenue to sort of lift.
Um, fourth, we,
because we're talking about the 20 22, 20 23 year, we,
we partnered with, um, other organizations around Cycl
and Gabrielle Relief concert out West.
It's a wonderful day. We raised over $750,000,
had a over a million views online,
and it was a fantastic sort of celebration
to bring people from, you know, those challenges of Covid,
um, and Pleasingly sort, looking at how we sort of partnered
with other platforms like TikTok.
We had influencers who are not known by me,
but maybe, you know, a lot of our younger generation
and TV NZ and the like.
So that was fantastic.
And I just wanna sort of close on this slide with, um,
we've really had a focus on our indigenous, uh,
international indigenous sort of, um, collaboration.
And so really reigniting, um,
that collective and pleasing
and really pleased that sort of Shane agreed to sort
of chair, uh, this group of indigenous broadcasters.
And early in the year we had, so we had, uh, all
of our indigenous partners from around the world came to,
we hosted them at F Maori,
and we had, um, a wonderful few days talking about the
future of indigenous broadcasting.
And so, um, that's been fantastic.
I think the key insight there is that, you know,
all other indigenous communities
and broadcasters still look to us as the, as the exemplar
and the benchmark in this space.
Um, which is always interesting when we think about the
current context we find ourselves in
with funding and other pressures.
But, um, I think that's, we'll continue to build on that
and leverage the capabilities and, and insights
and learnings that they have.
Um, and I think, I just think it's just useful, again,
for our organization
and more broadly for Maori to be able
to make those connections globally.
And then, um, the last slide is really
about navigating change.
Um, and a, a big focus for us, quite apart from the fact
of the year that's in review,
but over the last 12 months, a big focus for us has been
to navigate, um, the change, the challenges
that we find ourselves in.
Mm-Hmm. Um, I'm not going to talk
to you about all the funding issues
'cause I feel like it's Groundhog Day on that matter.
We, we, we tend to come here every time to select committee
to talk about non inflation
proofing and, and everything else.
Um, but what we've really focused on is what's within our
control, and we know what we have in terms of funding,
and so we're looking to, uh, rightsize our organization
and think, think about what the strategic priorities
and direction for us might be.
Um, in that sense, I think as you would see from the office
of the auditor general report, I mean, um, you know,
from a financial management systems
and control standpoint, um, that's, that we got a very good,
which is, which is very good.
Um, but the, the, the key challenge that we do face is, um,
the reduction in funding.
Yeah. And we'll talk a little bit about that,
and I'll ask Shane to make some comments on that.
And that's in the order of 10.3 million.
Um, and so a big focus for us is really looking at, uh,
the long-term sustainability
and what proactive steps that we, that we can take
as a board and also Shane and the senior leadership team
and the organization around our content strategy
and our focus, I heard earlier with Tam Paho, you know,
for us it's not about our, it's actually about, um,
focusing on, um, high impact projects
and content that are gonna deliver the language
and culture outcomes we want.
Um, thinking about how we can, we are looking
to transition our T channel to a full online offering, um,
and platform, which we're looking
to do from March next year, that will,
that will save us transmission costs.
Um, again, that's in the order of two
and a half million dollars a year, um, for having
to transmit that particular channel.
And so redirecting some of that resource to
that online offering.
And then, um, streamlining the leadership team.
So we've taken some initial steps in that respect.
Um, and then looking at a review of the organization
and how the broader organization
and how we realign the organization to be focused on, um,
our strategy moving forward.
Um, but I think that's, that's sort of where I would sort
of stop and I might just hand over briefly to Shane,
and then we can get into questions.
Shane. Uh, uh,
uh, the only comment that I would make,
'cause I'm sure there are many questions, is just
to acknowledge our team.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, our kaihoi, the paddlers of our Waka, uh,
who are responsible for the great, uh, achievements
that Jamie has just spoken about.
And, uh, at a time when we are navigating turbulent
and uncertain waters, uh, we, uh,
have them in our highest, um, thoughts
and priorities at the moment, uh,
given the challenges that we currently face.
So just really wanted to acknowledge, uh, our colleagues,
the team killed at this time killed it.
Okay. Um, hir, so we've got questions. Um, Shannon Halbert,
Um, is, is really,
you've got some big changes ahead of you,
and I was privileged enough to come to, uh,
your recent Wang, uh, with staff
and people from the sector to talk about the future
of Maori broadcasting.
Uh, more recently, the government has instructed, uh, you,
I believe Shane is one of the, the chief executives, um,
to take a needs based approach.
Uh, um, I'm keen to understand what, uh, what were the,
what are the drivers for your change,
but secondly, what are the implications
or concerns that you have around moving from effectively,
uh, focus on, uh, the revitalization
of our language through broadcasting
and shifting to a needs-based approach to serve all
of our tableau, our whole,
Uh, so the, uh, imminent challenges
that we currently face are a reduction in funding.
So at the end of this financial year, uh, our funding, uh,
will reduce by 6.3 million and then the,
and by $4 million the following year.
Uh, so as the tojo has explained, uh,
we are taking action now, uh, decisive action
to refit the organization
and to be able to operate within our means.
Uh, it's approximately, uh, 21% of our current budget.
And, uh, as some of the committee may be aware, we, uh,
announced, uh, recently some decisions,
which the Tojo has covered off, uh, three key decisions,
the reduction in the senior leadership team.
Hmm. The shift of the channel, uh, from a, a linear offering
to a, an online platform only, as well as a decision
to reduce investment in content.
Uh, those decisions have been made
and we are currently, uh, carrying those out.
And, uh, because we haven't been able to, as a result
of those activities, uh, reach the target
that we've set ourselves, the target is 12.5 million,
which is 25% of our current budget.
We've allowed four CPI adjustments as well as the need
for us to invest in digital, uh, which is why we've, uh,
identified that as our target.
We haven't been able to deliver that full target, uh,
based on those decisions that have been made.
And so therefore, as our last resort, we are now having
to look at the wide organization.
Uh, and so we are carrying out that review as we speak,
and we, uh, expect to be able to go back to our staff
and to the organization by the end of this month, uh,
with a proposal.
Uh, that's, to answer your first question,
can you just repeat your second question
Just in the context of shifting to needs based, how does
that reconcile with the co
Um, so it, it doesn't really apply to us Yeah.
Because of, um, our
Statute sets out, um, what our mandate is, um,
as an organization Mm-Hmm.
Um, and we'll continue to do that.
I think one of the, um, key matters
that we have had ongoing discussions with previous ministers
and the current minister is that, you know,
we live in a very different world than
that which we were born into 20 years
ago as an organization.
And so I think, you know, um, we are very open to exploring
what the opportunities are for, for Kata Ma to be,
I think the broader, the broader IL ecosystem around, um,
you know, how we can sort of reflect who
and what we are today and where we want to go in the future.
So there's that piece. Um,
and I guess on the sort of piece, as I said earlier,
I mean, the, the board are very cognizant of the fact that
with the funding cuts that we have, we have a duty of care
to our Kai Kai and to our Kai Mahi that we, we can't,
we couldn't wait for ministers
and other politicians to make decisions for us.
And so we actually took our own and to, to take decisions.
Yeah. Um, and that's really where we are. It's challenging.
It's challenging, particularly when you think
about our 20th year.
Mm-Hmm. Um, but it, it is what it is.
But I think, you know, from a needs-based standpoint,
I mean, we've got all of our policies,
we've got our business processes,
we will continue to do what we do. I'm
Sorry. Oh, can
I just, um, just on the point of man, I think that
that is what we aim to, uh, live
and breathe every day given, uh, our history.
Uh, as we know, f Maori was established in response
to two treaty claims, which have
provided Maori with the opportunity to tell our own stories
and our language, uh, in our own ways.
And that is something that we, uh, protect
and continue to, uh, feel very privileged to be able to do,
but is always at the, uh, core of our approach in,
in the work that we do every day. Um,
Just a, a follow up question.
And during scrutiny week, um, the minister, uh,
talked about a possibility of bringing together
for Ka Maori alongside Tamai Paho, uh,
um, I wondered if there was any formal conversations
that have happened around that, uh, as a part
of your restructure and discussions, uh,
and what your view of that might be to date.
Uh, I'm not aware of any formal, uh, conversations
that have, uh, taken place,
but what I would say is that there is always opportunity
for better collaboration, uh, across the, uh,
for Maori entities.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, given the, uh, work that we, uh, are charged
and responsible to deliver.
Next question from Dr. Lawrence Sun.
Uh,
so now in terms of the report that they've produced,
clearly what we're seeing is, you know,
as I guess someone from the outside, the
Maori is a key platform for introducing trio,
but also having that, that broader spectrum, not just
for tga, but also for tga.
And I think one of the, the aims we see here is
that we are hoping to achieve 1 million
trio speakers by 2040.
How do you see in terms of the trajectory and the funding
and the reprioritization have to do in order for, you know,
what impact and affect the way that we achieve that goal?
Is my kind of first question.
And I think, um, you mentioned in terms of the,
the work you have to do to get ahead
of the game into reprioritizing.
Um, what sort of, if you can answer this, um,
how has that shift your focus away from actually doing the
mahi and doing the work
of producing those excellent programs?
And then instead, will you have
to do is spend the time to do your restructure?
So what energy has been spent instead of doing the work,
and how has it also affected staff morale?
Do you have any comments on that?
There are a number of questions in there, so, um,
we'll try and, uh, address them all.
I think the first, uh, question in terms of the impact
that the funding loss will have on
content, it will be significant.
Uh, we've had to decide to,
and we, we we're still working through the exact, uh,
reduction that will be made, but there will be a significant
reduction in the investment and content
and, uh, given content is king
or content is queen, uh, that is our bread and butter.
And so when you think about the numbers
that the tojo shared earlier, for example,
social media reached 2.5 million.
We do believe that we contribute significantly
to the audacious goal of 1 million speakers by 2040.
There will also be an, an impact
because, uh, of the wider realignment, uh, process
that we are currently having to undertake
and the possible loss of jobs in terms of the,
uh, amount of time
and energy that has been spent on the realignment process,
it's significant as you will appreciate, uh,
because we want to make sure that we do it right
and we uphold the values that we have
Maori in the process that we have undertaken.
Because this, uh, is not just about, uh, recutting
or resizing the organization based on resource.
And because of the funding loss,
it's actually about ensuring the next 20 years
and beyond f Maori.
So it's about future proofing.
So it is about, uh, living within our means,
but also ensuring that we are still able
to do our job and do it well.
So we are looking at how we can better optimize resources,
how we can better, uh, improve workflows,
streamline processes, how we can be more efficient
and, uh, what type
of skills we need today, but also tomorrow.
So all of that, uh, is taking a significant amount of time,
but from the outset, we wanted to make sure
that we do it in the right way.
And so, uh, we have, uh, uh,
hosted a range of different forum in which we've been able
to engage the wider sector in which we've been able
to engage audiences
and of course our own Kai our staff over the last three
months where we've been seeking input
and feedback on the realignment process.
'cause we know that, uh, in order for
any realignment process
and restructuring, uh, to succeed, it needs
to be well-informed and informed by those
who know the organization the best.
Maybe talk about the independent sector
and our approach to content partnerships. Yeah.
The, the, uh, the, um, we, we are as, as also part of
that, uh, process, looking at how we can, um, uh,
partner with other media companies, uh,
with other independent production companies, as well as
with other, uh, technology platforms.
Uh, and that is to, uh, uh, aim
to expand the reach that we have, uh, expand our reach
to audiences, uh, as well as, uh,
better use data analytics to understand
what our audiences want and where they want that content
and what type of content they want as well.
And, uh, the Tojo mentioned it, uh,
during the slide presentation.
We're also wanting to, uh, better collaborate
and co-produce content, uh, locally
and internationally so that we can expand our reach
and audiences globally as well.
Uh, so one supplementary.
Yeah, so still continue on the line of questions
around the funding because we know that
that's a major focus.
Um, as you have mentioned, um, now in terms of,
let's say the KPIs in terms of the outcomes for, for Kaari,
it has met all of the outcomes,
even exceeded all of the outcomes.
So when we are looking at funding on the basis
of an evidence-based approach, you have met that evidence
that is needed yet you see,
you mentioned there's a reduction of funding.
How does that work in terms of then what's the point
of meeting those targets in the first place when it has zero
impact on how you are being funded?
So, and again, coming back to the,
the fact that I, I guess for me, I'm struggling
to understand that when you do something really,
really well, but then you get punished
for it instead being rewarded for it.
How does it make for KA MA and how does it make your staff
and, you know, the senior leaders feel in terms
of meeting those targets in the first place?
I'll start. And then Shane, I mean, I think
our success has been a consequence of the loyalty
and commitment of our Kai Jordan.
Um, and when I reflect on coming up six years
involvement on the board of Akata Maori, um, you know,
we succeed 'cause of our Kai
and, um, we've talked previously at select committees
and made submissions to various ministers.
You know, our funding to produce an hour of content relative
to funding for mainstream is about 30% of what,
what mainstream are funded for in our mm-Hmm.
In, in our content. And I think, you know, there's,
there's always a risk that, you know,
because the is strong, we've had this conversation
as I entities mm-Hmm.
We're all involved in these entities
because we believe in these.
And that's what drives not only the board,
our senior management, but also a lot of our,
so very much based and focused.
Um, and there is, there are some downsides to that
because we continue to achieve
and do the things that we need to do on limited resources,
which, you know, cannot be sustained in the long term.
So I think, you know, we've, we've come to a point
where we just can't accept and tolerate that anymore.
Mm-Hmm. Um,
and so that's why part of, you know, moving forward
with our realignment is, you know, what level
of content will we produce
and actually ensuring that it is appropriate.
Next, we got some question from Craig. David. Yeah.
Uh, and Jamie,
um, um,
okay, so, so two part this,
and it's really just, just picking up on this, um, the, uh,
obviously obviously the funding is changing
and there's, there's, there's reason for that.
My understanding is that that's,
in some ways it's not a surprise
because the funding was, uh, it was, first of all,
it was time limited, so it was two years extra funding,
and then on top of that, it was the decision
by like having in last year to bring forward year funding.
So some ways where you are at, I guess, yeah.
I'm presuming that the board and the,
and the executive were, were hoping that, you know,
things might change, but obviously in terms of the decisions
that were made, it sounds and,
and the, the speed with which you've been able to,
I case obviously you, you had some of that in mind,
so thank you very much.
Thank you. First of all, thank you for, for embracing
that need for that change.
But just picking up on an earlier comment, um, around the,
you know, potential of, of, um, some kind of rationalization
or, or, um, enhancement of that sector
because Maori, um, you know,
on, uh, um, on, uh, um,
so could you, could you potentially speak to what, what
that might look like as you, as, as things continue
to pivot, uh, and, uh,
and also pivot within kinds of the technology
that you are working with
and the, the, the very, um,
different appetites of consumers.
Um, what, what,
what other things you might have in mind in terms of,
in terms of other moderations
and innovations in the coming years?
Uh, just on the first point, um, what I would say is that,
uh, the loss of funding is
because it was time locked, right.
As, as you'll be aware. Yeah.
But it's also, um, part of a wider context,
and that is that regards to Maori hasn't received any
increase funding since 2008, right?
Yeah. And so under the previous government,
the Maori media sector,
that was under review for four years.
Right. And because it was being reviewed,
the minister at the time decided
to provide temporary funding.
Okay. But as the report from that review will show,
there was always a need for government
to address the longstanding, uh,
funding inequity that existed.
So while we always were aware that we were in receipt
of temporary funding, we always believed that the issue
that we had faced for some time was going to be resolved.
Um, the, sorry, I've forgotten your next question.
Uh, um, so, so appreciate that.
And then, and then, yeah, thank you for the way then
that you have responded as difficult
as I appreciate, as, as it is.
Um, what, given that and your,
and your, it appears you, you, you accepting, um, now the,
the, the change landscape,
what else do you see in potential innovation and, um,
and, uh, collaboration within the wider sector where
that whole sector shares the, the, the number one goal
of seeing, um, New Zealand become, you know,
genuinely bilingual nation?
Again, I think to, um, first of all, just
to define the sector
because, uh, obviously given our special role, we are part
of the media sector,
but also of the language revitalize
revitalization sector too, right?
And so we see ourselves supporting and being part of both.
Okay. Uh, the opportunities that exist are, especially
around digital innovation and partnerships.
And I spoke briefly on partnerships on the latter earlier.
Uh, we are constantly looking at opportunities
to collaborate with other media companies, including, uh,
some of the other stay home, uh, organizations like TNZ
and RNZ Yeah.
As an example of that.
Um, and some of you may have been able
to watch it recently at the, at the King's funeral,
where we saw, uh, actually probably the largest, uh,
single collaboration of media working together
to ensure that not just the final day,
but the seven day event was, uh, made available on
as many platforms as possible.
And so, uh, we were able to make that available on channel.
Uh, so that was available on TV as well as across our, uh,
online and social media platforms as well as many others.
And that included also the final day, uh, of the burial
and final, and the, uh, ointment of the new Maori queen,
which was made, uh, publicly available as well.
So I think, uh, that just, uh,
underscores the absolute importance of partnerships, uh,
to ensure that, going back to your initial question,
we are able to expand our reach that we're able
to contribute, uh, significantly to that audacious goal
of 1 million speakers by 2040.
The, uh, earlier point on digital innovation is absolutely
critical, but there are still, uh, challenges
because we still operate under a piece of legislation
that was, uh, developed
and implemented at a time when Facebook was just being
discovered, uh,
and where internet, uh, costs were exorbited.
Um, and so while we are having to navigate our way through
that, uh, we still identify the need to invest in digital,
and we have, uh, which is why it is a key, uh, po
or pillar of our current realignment
process that we're undertaking.
That's why we've also allowed, uh, ourselves
some space within the cost savings target to ensure
that we have the necessary, well,
we're not gonna have it all,
but that we have some, uh, funding available
to invest into digital innovation.
Uh, quick part, uh, thank you.
Just going back to the funding
and inequities that you spoke of, I trust
that they haven't been resolved,
but I'm interested in what, um, advice
or discussions that you've had with the minister
and what advice he's given you about
resolving those inequities.
Uh, the minister is, uh, very supportive of the role
that we, um, hold at AKA Maori and has made that very clear
and has made that clear to the board
and to management, which we appreciate.
And, uh, we're in ongoing discussions around, uh,
the funding challenges that we face.
Uh, one of the reasons why we have made, uh, the decisions
that we have is because we received clear advice from
officials that we needed to, uh, take action now
and plan for the imminent fiscal cliffs, uh, that we face.
But in terms of, uh, direct conversation with the minister,
we, we, we, we, um, we are in ongoing conversations
around the funding challenges that we have.
Um, next we've got a question from David.
Um, I wanted to you spoken depth
around the funding challenges of that
and also the evolution, uh, that the organization has
with today's context itself.
But you, this comment made early on, uh, Jamie,
around the legislation and the,
and the age that you've just spoken to as well.
Shane, my question is based around
that legislation about its fit for purpose Mm-Hmm.
Is it restrictive in any way, uh, for, for
what you see your future is,
as you say, change quite brightly.
You, you're in a different world today. Mm-Hmm.
So the legislation itself and have you got restrictions and,
and is it restraining you of being able to, in,
in short, it's not fit for purpose.
And that was also our submission to the sector review.
Uh, that was completed last year in September.
One of the, uh, actions, uh, that were meant to have, uh,
taken, uh, shape from that review was a review of our ledge.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, unfortunately that was not completed,
and it's still outstanding is still
one of those actions outstanding.
A couple of the key examples, uh, is that, for example,
there is no reference to digital or any emerging
or new, uh, platform technology, um, uh, for us to focus on.
And the other challenge too is that we are not funded
to deliver to digital platforms as well.
So that's, uh, a conflated challenge that we,
we we currently face.
It's under the legislation, our, yeah, that's,
it's about linear, linear, um, hours and outcomes.
Yeah. Okay. Interesting. Thank you. Very good to know.
Uh, next we've got Raymond. Yeah, I can only gentleman.
Thank you. Um, I just wanna start off by saying, um,
with respect to your comment earlier
that you wanna make sure language
reaches audience around the world.
Well, my AU in Australia used the word au very
often, the leese.
Um, I just wanna ask with respect to the written, um,
answers to the written questions, um, a question on page 12.
Um, uh, question 52 with respect to
how much was spent on public relations
or communication staff, um, over the last few years,
and I can see it's usually around 200,000 mark.
Yes. Um, for a couple of staff,
but three staff in, in, um, 2022.
Can you please like, just take us through,
what would those staff, um, do?
I mean, I understand communications and public relations,
but with respect to, to, um, to the mahi of, um, Maori,
what would they, what were their roles specifically?
What were you hoping that they can achieve
for the organization?
So my understanding is that these costs relate
to two corporate comms, uh, staff.
And so they're responsible, uh,
for telling our corporate story, uh, as well as preparing
for events like these two, uh,
which take considerable resource and time.
They also are responsible for developing
and issuing, uh, media releases
and responding to media inquiries.
Also responsible for addressing any OIA inquiries
that we may receive, as well as, uh, internal comms
with our own staff.
So quite a, a, a range of, uh, responsibilities.
Uh, they are also responsible
for the accountability documents that we have
to deliver every year, such as our annual report, as well
as the, um, statement of intent.
Um, which actually links to one
of the earlier questions about why the current act is,
uh, not fit for purpose.
Uh, we are the only entity that is required
to deliver a statement of intent, which covers three
to five years every year,
where every other entity is only required
to deliver that every three years.
So quite resource, uh, consuming,
um, and, you know, adds
to the already heavy workload that we have.
Yeah, I think it was a different time 20 years ago
where yeah, the level of trust may not have been as high.
Yeah. Because, and so why they cover three
to five years being provided annually just
doesn't make sense.
Good. Very good. Very good to know.
Last question to Dr. Lawrence. Thank you.
Uh, um, so I want
to look at the broader picture in terms of where are
within sort of the international landscape.
'cause part of the things to talk,
talking about is the digitalization
and more we're looking at from an international perspective,
um, particularly some of t's obligations, uh, in terms
of re digitalization.
And this is something that all
around the world you will see people having their eyes on
RTO because we're probably leading on some of these efforts,
and particularly when it comes
to re digitalization of Korea.
Uh, which one the same is Tonga?
Um, I want to know, do you see, um, where,
um, sits within that piece of the puzzle in terms
of our international reach?
And have you seen with your digitalization effort
and some of the data that you put through in your report,
um, that you've seen this growth in terms
of the international uptake, both in terms
of the social media content,
but also in terms of the downloading from the, so,
uh, first of all, I just want
to acknowledge our indigenous counterparts across the globe,
uh, for the amazing work that they do
and revitalizing their languages.
Uh, because unlike us here, we had one language.
Most other indigenous, uh, peoples have meaning.
Uh, and I would, uh, answer the question in three ways.
Uh, when we talk about re indigenizing ourselves,
and we were fortunate to have, uh,
nearly 300 indigenous peoples here earlier in March attend
our conference.
Part of that, we were able to demonstrate
and take them through what we've been able to achieve
by adopting pun as our strategic narrative.
And they were absolutely blown away by it being able to use,
uh, our own stories, our people, our stories to help
re indigenize ourselves,
but also to help keep us on track in terms of the work
that we do every day.
Uh, they were completely impressed by it,
and so much so some of them have actually asked some
of my team to meet
and to understand better
how they could adopt such a, an approach.
Another example that I would talk about is the, you know,
for Maori, when you look at our 20 year history, have
led the way, uh, and I say that humbly
and modestly when it comes to indigenous broadcasting.
Uh, for example, 2008, the one of the first, uh,
indigenous channels, 100%.
Uh, fast forward now, uh, 16 years later,
we have two other indigenous broadcasters now, um,
or they've just recently actually launched their own,
uh, 10 channels.
Um, it's unfortunate we're having to establish ours, um,
for linear, but, um, you, you will see though the pattern
where we've created an opportunity
and it has been picked up by others.
The third thing I would say is,
and this actually was raised at the conference earlier this
year about the prospect of having an indigenous Netflix.
And it was identified, um, by everyone there actually, um,
from the visiting countries
that Maori Plus out at actually provides that experience.
And for free, uh, it provides, uh, hours
of indigenous content, not just in, uh,
in the Maori language,
but in other languages as well, which is why it's important
that we are part of collectors,
like within the World Indigenous Broadcasters network, so
that we can, uh, share content
but also, uh, extend the reach that our content, uh, has
with foreign and global audiences.
Mm-Hmm, me. Wonderful.
Um, I think on that note, we had just come to the end
of the session, so, um, AMI thank you, Jamie.
Um, Shane, thank you to your team.
You guys do a huge amount of thank you for your mahi, uh,
to not have funding from increase from 2008
to 2021, yet to see the outcomes
that you guys are delivering.
There's no mean fact. So, um, wish you the best.
Certainly take some good, um, good, um,
things from this session around the ledge as well.
So.